Socketeer Protocol
===

ver. **1**, rev. 3

- [websocket](#websocket)
- [handshake](#handshake)
- [protocol version query](#protocol-version-query)
- [heartbeats](#heartbeats)
- [session resuming](#session-resuming)
- [event messages](#event-messages)
- [action messages](#action-messages)
- [action response messages](#action-response-messages)
- [binary data](#binary-data)

websocket
---

Socketeer relies on an [RFC6455](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6455)-compliant websocket implementation library. The Node.js version uses the [ws](https://github.com/websockets/ws/) package.

Browser support: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebSocket#Browser_implementation

handshake
---

When the client first connects, before it can do anything else, it **must** complete the handshake.

Socketeer's handshake consists of the following parts, done in order:

* Protocol version query
* Heartbeat interval set message
* Session resume token query

If the handshake is done out of order, or an unexpected message is received, then the connection must be closed.

```
implementation note

The handshake should have a configurable timeout of `handshakeTimeout`,
which defaults to 10000ms (10 seconds).
If the handshake does not complete in that time,
then the connection must be closed.
```

protocol version query
---

Protocol version query is used to determine if the client's version of Socketeer is compatible with the server. The message, sent by the client, is as such:

`v{VERSION}`, where `{VERSION}` is the protocol version (in this case, `1`)

If the server's protocol version is not compatible with the client's protocol version, then the server must send `v?`, and then close the connection.

If the version is compatible, then the server will respond with the heartbeat set interval message.

heartbeats
---

Socketeer does its own form of heartbeats, because the Web API's websockets' ping/pongs do not have an API, and are implemented differently across platforms. <sup>[[1]](http://stackoverflow.com/a/10586583)</sup>

The Socketeer server is the "master" of heartbeats. It sets the interval, and is the only one that sends the "ping"s. The Socketeer client, upon receiving the server's "ping"s must immediately respond with the "pong"s.

During the handshake, the server sets the heartbeat interval, or how long (in milliseconds) the server waits between pings.

The heartbeat set interval message is as follows:

`i{MS}`, where `{MS}` is a positive integer (max 2147483647) that indicates how long in milliseconds the interval between each server ping will be.

The heartbeat mesage is a single `h`, regardless of it being "ping" or "pong". If the server sends the heartbeat message, it's a "ping". Otherwise, it's a "pong".

Heartbeat flow is as such:

1. Server is started, and configured with a `serverHeartbeatTimeout` and `heartbeatInterval`.
    - `serverHeartbeatTimeout` is the span of time in milliseconds to wait for the client's "pong" message before closing (or "timing out") the connection to the client.
    - `heartbeatInterval` is the span of time in milliseconds to wait between sending "ping"s.
2. Client is configured with a `clientHeartbeatTimeout`, and begins the connection to the server.
    - `clientHeartbeatTimeout` is the span of time in milliseconds to wait for the server's "ping" message before closing (or "timing out") the connection to the server.
3. The handshake is completed, and the client is configured with `heartbeatInterval`.
    - Client begins the heartbeat timeout, with the time of `heartbeatInterval + clientHeartbeatTimeout`. If a "ping" is not sent from the server within that time, then the client closes the connection.
4. Server sends a "ping" `heartbeatInterval` milliseconds after sending the heartbeat interval set message.
    - Client stops the existing heartbeat timeout, and starts a new one, with the time of (`heartbeatInterval + clientHeartbeatTimeout`)
    - Client immediately responds with a "pong".
        + If the server does not receive a "pong" message within the `serverHeartbeatTimeout` time, then the server closes the connection.
5. Server continuously sends a "ping" `heartbeatInterval` milliseconds after sending the last "ping".
    - Client handles the heartbeats exactly how it handles heartbeats in step 4.

```
implementation note

A Socketeer implementation should
(but is not required to) have these defaults:

serverHeartbeatTimeout: 15000
heartbeatInterval: 10000
clientHeartbeatTimeout: 15000
```

session resuming
---

Socketeer supports session resuming, which means that if a socket disconnects, the server won't assume that the client is "closed" until after the configured session resume timeout.

```
implementation note

Socketeer server implementations should let you
configure whether the server supports session resuming,
and what the session resume timeout is.


Session resuming support should be off by default.
Session resume timeout should be 10000 (milliseconds) by default.
Server should not allow different IP session resuming by default.
```

If the connection is not an attempt to resume the session, the client must check if the server supports session resuming by trying to get a session resume token. The message is as follows:

`r?`

When the server receives the query, it must do one of two things:

- If the server does *not* support session resuming, it must respond with `r`, so the client knows that the server is not going to give it a token.
- If the server *does* support session resuming, then it must generate a unique token (preferably long, and cryptographically secure) with a minimum length of 5 and a maximum length of 200 so both the server and client can store it for future use, and respond with `r:{TOKEN}`, where `{TOKEN}` is the generated token.

Once the client is disconnected after the completion of the handshake, then the session resume timeout begins.

If a new client tries to resume a session with the generated token before the existing client disconnects, the token is silently devalidated (the session resume timeout never starts on existing client disconnect), and the server acts as if the token was not valid (by sending `r-`).

```
implementation note

The token string length should be at least 150 by default
(preferably 200), and should contain alphanumeric characters.
A devalidated or used token should not be reused within the
next 6 hours since its devalidation or usage.
```

To resume the session, the client must reconnect, start the handshake, and after receiving the heartbeat set interval message, authenticate with the server for session resuming. The message format is as follows:

`r@{TOKEN}`

Where `{TOKEN}` is the session resuming token. For example, if the server responded with `r:abc123`, then the client must send `r@abc123`.

The server then checks the token, and makes sure it passes the following conditions:

- The token exists, is not used and not devalidated.
- A session resume timeout exists for the session.
- Client attempted session resuming before the session resume timeout (in which the session resume timeout is stopped and removed).
- Unless the server is configured to allow this, the new connection's IP is the same as the old connection's IP.

If the server support session resuming, and the session exists, then server must devalidate the old token, respond with `r+{TOKEN}` (where `{TOKEN}` is a freshly generated token), and send any pending messages. Else, the server must respond with `r-`, where the client will disconnect.

```
implementation note

The client disconnects on 'r-' because of Socketeer's API:
If the client gets disconnected, the user has the option
of calling client.resume(), which returns a Promise,
fulfilling on successful session resume, and rejecting in all other cases.

Example code:

const client = new Client('ws://localhost')
client.on('close', async function () {
  if (await client.resume()) return
  // handle client close because session resume failed
})
```

event messages
---

Event messages have the following structure:

```json
{
    "e": "event-name",
    "d": {
        "some": "data"
    }
}
```

- `e` is the event name.
- `d` is the event data.

action messages
---

Action messages have the following structure:

```json
{
    "i": 123,
    "a": "action-name",
    "d": {
        "some": "data"
    }
}
```

The server must respond to action messages with action response messages.

- `i` is the action ID. The receiver of the action responds to the action by echoing the ID value, so it can be properly handled.
- `a` is the action name.
- `d` is the action data.

action response messages
---

```json
{
    "i": 123,
    "s": 0,
    "d": {
        "some": "data"
    }
}
```

- `i` is the action ID. See how action IDs are used in the action message documentation.
- `s` is the action response status. This is a number, which can be one of the following:
    + `0` - "OK": Action went fine.
    + `1` - "NONEXISTENT": Action does not exist (client did not set up a handler for it)
    + `2` - "ERROR": An error occured while calling the action handler.
- `d` is the action data. If `s` is not `0`, then `d` may be an error message.

binary data
---

Socketeer currently does not support binary data, but will in later releases and newer protocols.
